'\" t
.\" srecord - manipulate eprom load files
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 2000, 2001, 2005-2009, 2014 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_cmp
.TH \*(n) 1 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_cmp \- compare two EPROM load files for equality
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_cmp(1)" "Compare two EPROM load files for equality"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \*(n)
[
.IR option \&...
]
.IR filename \&...
.br
.B \*(n)
.B \-Help
.br
.B \*(n)
.B \-VERSion
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I \*(n)
program is used to compare two EPROM load files for equality.  This
comparison is performed irrespective of the load order of the data in
each of the files.
.so man/man1/o_input.so
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.so man/man1/o_at.so
.TP 8n
.B \-Help
.br
Provide some help with using the
.I \*(n)
program.
.TP 8n
\fB\-IGnore_Checksums\fP
.so man/man1/o_ignore_checksums.so
.so man/man1/o_sequence.so
.so man/man1/o_multiple.so
.TP 8n
.B \-VERSion
.br
Print the version of the
.I \*(n)
program being executed.
.TP 8n
.B \-Verbose
.br
This option may be used to obtain more information about how and where
the two files differ.  Please note that this takes longer, and the output
can be voluminous.
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_options.so
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.SH EXAMPLE
A common use for the \fI\*(n)\fP command is to verify that a particular
signature is present in the code.  In this example, the signature is
in a file called \[lq]signature[rq], and the EPROM image is in a file
called \[lq]image[rq].  We assume they are both Motorola S\[hy]Record format,
although this will work for all formats:
.sp 0.25
.RS
.ft CW
\*(n) signature  image \-crop \-within signature
.ft R
.RE
.sp 0.25
The signature need not be at the start of memory, nor need it be one
single contiguous piece of memory.  In the above example, the portions
of the image which have the same address range as the signature are
compared with the signature.
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
