'\" t
.\"     srecord - manipulate eprom load files
.\"     Copyright (C) 1998, 2001, 2005-2009, 2013 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_info
.TH \*(n) 1 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_info \- information about EPROM load files
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_info(1)" "Information about EPROM load files"
.\}
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \*(n)
[
.IR option \&...
]
.IR filename \&...
.br
.B \*(n)
.B \-Help
.br
.B \*(n)
.B \-VERSion
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fI\*(n)\fP program is used to obtain input about EPROM load files.
It reads the files specified, and then presents statistics about them.
These statistics include: the file header if any, the execution start
address if any, and the address ranges covered by the data if any.
.PP
If there is binary data the header, it will be presented using the URL
encoding that uses % followed by two hexadeimal characters.
For example a backspace would be encoded as \[lq]%08\[rq].
(This is symmetric with the srec_cat \[hy]\[hy]header opion).
.so man/man1/o_input.so
.br
.ne 1i
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are understood:
.so man/man1/o_at.so
.TP 8n
.B \-Help
.br
Provide some help with using the
.I \*(n)
program.
.TP 8n
\fB\-IGnore_Checksums\fP
.so man/man1/o_ignore_checksums.so
.so man/man1/o_sequence.so
.so man/man1/o_multiple.so
.TP 8n
.B \-VERSion
.br
Print the version of the
.I \*(n)
program being executed.
.PP
All other options will produce a diagnostic error.
.so man/man1/z_options.so
.so man/man1/z_exit.so
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
