'\" t
.\" srecord - Manipulate EPROM load files
.\" Copyright (C) 2011 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_idt
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_idt \- IDT/sim binary file format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_idt(5)" "IDT/sim binary file format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
This format comes from Integrated Device Technology (IDT) System
Integration Manager (IDT/sim).
.PP
It is almost identical to the Motorola S\[hy]Record format,
except that most of each record is in binary, and there is no
line termination character.
The 'S' and tag characters are the same (ascii), however all other bytes are
emitted as binary, rather than as a 2\[hy]byte hexadecimal ascii encoding.
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP 8n
\f[I]srec_motorola\fP(5)
The orginal Motorola S\[hy]Record format.
.TP 8n
\f[I]srec_wilson\fP(5)
For a different spin on making S\[hy]Record into a more densely packed
binary file.
.ds n) srec_cat
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
