'\" t
.\" srecord - Manipulate EPROM load files
.\" Copyright (C) 2009, 2011, 2012, 2014 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_mif
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_mif \- Memory Initialization File (MIF) format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_mif(5)" "Memory Initialization File (MIF) format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
This format was invented by Altera.
.PP
.\" http://www.altera.com/support/software/nativelink/quartus2/glossary/
.\"    def_mif.html
An ASCII text file (with the extension .mif) that specifies the initial
content of a memory block (CAM, RAM, or ROM), that is, the initial
values for each address. This file is used during project compilation
and/or simulation. You can create a Memory Initialization File in the
Memory Editor, the In\[hy]System Memory Content Editor, or the Quartus II
Text Editor.
.PP
A Memory Initialization File serves as an input file for memory
initialization in the Compiler and Simulator. You can also use a
Hexadecimal (Intel\[hy]Format) File (.hex) to provide memory initialization
data.
.PP
A Memory Initialization File contains the initial values for each
address in the memory. A separate file is required for each memory
block. In a Memory Initialization File, you must specify the memory
depth and width values. In addition, you can specify data radixes as
binary (BIN), hexadecimal (HEX), octal (OCT), signed decimal (DEC),
or unsigned decimal (UNS) to display and interpret addresses and data
values. Data values must match the specified data radix.
.PP
When creating a Memory Initialization File in the Quartus II Text
Editor, you must start with the DEPTH, WIDTH, ADDRESS_RADIX and
DATA_RADIX keywords. You can use Tab "\t" and Space " " characters as
separators, and insert multiple lines of comments with the percent "%"
character, or a single comment with double dash "\-\-" characters.
Address:data pairs represent data contained inside certain memory addresses
and you must place them between the CONTENT BEGIN and END keywords, as
shown in the following examples.
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
%  multiple\[hy]line comment
multiple\[hy]line comment  %
\-\- single\[hy]line comment
DEPTH = 8;                    \-\- The size of data in bits
WIDTH = 32;                   \-\- The size of memory in words
ADDRESS_RADIX = HEX;          \-\- The radix for address values
DATA_RADIX = BIN;             \-\- The radix for data values
CONTENT                       \-\- start of (address : data pairs)
BEGIN
00 : 00000000;                \-\- memory address : data
01 : 00000001;
02 : 00000010;
03 : 00000011;
04 : 00000100;
05 : 00000101;
06 : 00000110;
07 : 00000111;
08 : 00001000;
09 : 00001001;
0A : 00001010;
0B : 00001011;
0C : 00001100;
END;
.ft R
.fi
.RE
.PP
There are several ways to specify the address and data,
as seen in the following table:
.TS
tab(;);
l l lf(CW).
Notation;Interpretation;Example
T{
A : D;
T};T{
Addr[A] = D
T};T{
.nf
2 : 4
Address: 01234567
Data:    00400000
.fi
T}
T{
[A0..A1] : D;
.br
\f[I](See note below.)\fP
T};T{
Addr[A0] to [A1] contain data D
T};T{
.nf
[0..7] : 6
Address: 01234567
Data:    66666666
.fi
T}
T{
[A0..A1] : D0 D1;
.br
\f[I](See note below.)\fP
T};T{
.nf
Addr[A0] = D0,
Addr[A0+1] = D1,
Addr[A0+2] = D0,
Addr[A0+3] = D1,
until A0+n = A1
.fi
T};T{
.nf
[0..7] : 5 6
Address: 01234567
Data:    56565656
.fi
T}
T{
A : D0 D1 D2;
T};T{
.nf
Addr[A] = D0,
Addr[A+1] = D1,
Addr[A+2] = D2
.fi
T};T{
.nf
2 : 4 5 6
Address: 01234567
Data:    00456000
.fi
T}
.TE
.PP
\f[B]Note:\fP
The address range forms are limited in SRecord,
the range must be less than 255 bytes.
SRecord will never write an address range.
.PP
\f[B]Note:\fP
When reading MIF file, SRecord will round up the number of bits in the
WIDTH to be a multiple of 8.  Multi\[hy]byte values will be laid down in
memory as big\[hy]endian.
.PP
.\" http://www.mil.ufl.edu/4712/docs/mif_help.pdf
An ASCII text file (with the extension .mif) that specifies the initial
content of a memory block (CAM, RAM, or ROM), that is, the initial
values for each address.  This file is used during project compilation
and/or simulation.  A MIF contains the initial values for each address
in the memory.  In a MIF, you are also required to specify the memory
depth and width values.  In addition, you can specify the radixes used
to display and interpret addresses and data values.
.SH SIZE MULTIPLIER
In general, binary data will expand in sized by approximately 3.29
times when 8\[hy]bit data is represented with this format
(16 bit = 2.75, 32 bit = 2.47, 64 bit = 2.34).
.SH EXAMPLE
Following is a sample MIF:
.RS
.ft CW
.nf
DEPTH = 32; % Memory depth and width are required %
% DEPTH is the number of addresses %
WIDTH = 14; % WIDTH is the number of bits of data per word %
% DEPTH and WIDTH should be entered as decimal numbers %
ADDRESS_RADIX = HEX; % Address and value radixes are required %
DATA_RADIX = HEX; % Enter BIN, DEC, HEX, OCT, or UNS; unless %
                  % otherwise specified, radixes = HEX %
 \-\-Specify values for addresses, which can be single address or range
CONTENT
BEGIN
[0..F]: 3FFF;     % Range: Every address from 0 to F = 3FFF %
6     :    F;     % Single address: Address 6 = F %
8     :    F E 5; % Range starting from specific address %
\-\-                % Addr[8] = F, Addr[9] = E, Addr[A] = 5 %
END;
.fi
.ft R
.RE
.br
.ne 1i
.SH REFERENCE
The above information was gleaned from
the following sources:
.nf
http://www.altera.com/support/software/nativelink/quartus2/\%\
glossary/def_mif.html
http://www.mil.ufl.edu/4712/docs/mif_help.pdf
.fi
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
