'\" t
.\"     srecord - manipulate eprom load files
.\"     Copyright (C) 2003, 2006-2009 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_fairchild
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_fairchild \- Fairchild Fairbug file format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_fairchild(5)" "Fairchild Fairbug file format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Fairchild Fairbug format has 8\[hy]byte records.
A file begins with an address record and ends with an
end\[hy]of\[hy]file record.
.PP
.PP
There are three record types in this file format.
.PP
Address records are of the form
.TS
allbox,center,tab(;);
lf(CW) l.
S;\fInnnn\fP
.TE
indicating the address for the following data records.
.PP
Data records are of the form
.TS
allbox,center,tab(;);
lf(CW) l l.
X;\fIffffffffffffffff\fP;\fIc\fP
.TE
Each data record begins with an X and always contains 8 data bytes.
The \fIff\fP characters are hexadecimal byte values (8 bytes).
Each data byte is represented by 2
hexadecimal characters.
The \fIc\fP character is a hex digit being the the nibble\[hy]sum of the
data bytes.
A 1\[hy]digit hexadecimal checksum follows the data in each data record.
The checksum represents, in hexadecimal notation, the sum of the binary
equivalents of the 16 digits in the record;
the half carry from the fourth bit is ignored.
The programmer ignores any character (except for address characters and
the asterisk character, which terminates the data transfer) between a
checksum and the start character of the next data record. This space can
be used for comments.
.PP
The end\[hy]of\[hy]file record has the form
.TS
allbox,center,tab(;);
lf(CW).
*
.TE
The last record consists of an asterisk only, which indicates the end of file.
.SS Size Multiplier
In general, binary data will expand in sized by approximately 2.4 times
when represented with this format.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.br
.ne 2i
.SH EXAMPLE
Here is an example Fairchild Fairbug file.
It contains the data \[lq]Hello, World[rq] to be loaded at address 0x1000.
Notice how the last record is padded with 0xFF bytes.
.RS
.nf
.ft CW
S1000
X48656C6C6F2C2057C
X6F726C64210AFFFF3
*
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ds n) srec_cat
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
