'\" t
.\" srecord - Manipulate EPROM load files
.\" Copyright (C) 2012 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_coe.5
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_coe \- Xilinx Coefficient File Format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_coe(5)" "Xilinx Coefficient File Format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Xilinx Coefficient File Format
has a general syntax of the form:
.TS
tab(*);
l l l l l
l l l l l
l l l s s.
\f[I]keyword\fP*\[eq]*\f[I]value\fP*;*\f[I]optional comment\fP
\f[I]radix\[hy]keyword\fP*\[eq]*\f[I]value\fP*;*\f[I]optional comment\fP
\f[I]data\[hy]keyword\fP*\[eq]*\f[I]value\fP, ..., \f[I]value\fP\f[B];\fP
.TE
.PP
There are numerous keywords, only the \[lq]memory_initialization_radix\[rq]
and \[lq]memory_initialization_vector\[rq] keywords are used.
The semicolons are mandatory.
.SS Size Multiplier
Binary data stored in this format expand approximately 4 times
(5 time on Windows).
.\" We could get this to approach 4 on windows (and remain 4 on Linux)
.\" if we put more than one value per line, with commas and speces
.\" between.
.SS See Also
http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/sw_manuals/xilinx11/\
cgn_r_coe_file_syntax.htm
.ne 1i
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
