'\" t
.\"     srecord - manipulate eprom load files
.\"     Copyright (C) 2000, 2006-2009 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_tektronix_extended
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_tektronix_extended \- Tektronix Extended hexadecimal file format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_tektronix_extended(5)" "Tektronix Extended hexadecimal file format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
This format allows binary files to be uploaded and downloaded between
two computer systems, typically between a computer system (such as a
PC, Macintosh, or workstation) and an emulator or evaluation board for
microcontrollers and microprocessors.
.SS The Lines
Lines always start with a percent (%) character.  Each line consists
of 5 fields.  These are the length field, the type field, the checksum,
the address field (including address length), and the data field.
.br
.ne 2i
.SS The Fields
.TS
allbox,center,tab(;);
lf(CW) l l l l l.
%;Length;Type;Checksum;Address;Data
.TE
.TP 8n
Record Length
The record length field is a 2 character (1 byte) field that specifies
the number of characters (not bytes) in the record, excluding the percent.
.TP 8n
Type
The type field is a 1 character field that specifies whether
the record is data (6) or termination (8).
.TP 8n
Checksum
The checksum is an 2 character (1 byte) field that represents the
sum of all the nibbles on the line, excluding the checksum.
.TP 8n
Address
This is a 9 character field.  The first character is the address size;
it is always 8.  The remaining 8 chgaracters are the 4\[hy]byte address that
specifies where the data is to be loaded into memory.
.TP 8n
Data
The data field contains the executable code, memory\[hy]loadable data
or descriptive information to be transferred.
.br
.ne 2i
.SS Record Types
.TP 8n
6
A record containing data.
The data is placed at the address specified.
.TP 8n
8
A termination record.
The address field may optionally contain the address of the instruction
to which control is passed.  There is no data field.
.SS Size Multiplier
In general, binary data will expand in sized by approximately 2.5 times
when represented with this format.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.br
.ne 2i
.SH EXAMPLE
Here is an example Tektronix extended file.
It contains the data \[lq]Hello, World\[rq] to be loaded at address 0x006B.
.RS
.nf
.ft CW
%256D980000006B48656C6C6F2C20576F726C64210A
%09819800000000
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ds n) srec_cat
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
