'\" t
.\"     srecord - manipulate eprom load files
.\"     Copyright (C) 2001, 2006-2009 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_atmel_generic
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_atmel_generic \- Atmel Generic file format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_atmel_generic(5)" "Atmel Generic file format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
This format is the output of the Atmel AVR assembler.
The file contains two columns of hexadecimal coded values.
The first column is the 24\[hy]bit word address,
the second column is the 16\[hy]bit word data.
The columns are separated by a colon (`:') character.
.PP
By default, SRecord treats this is little\[hy]endian data (the least
significant byte first).  If you want big endian order,
use the \-atmel\[hy]generic\[hy]be argument instead.
.SS Size Multiplier
In general, binary data will expand in sized by approximately 6.0 times
when represented with this format (6.5 times in Windows).
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.br
.ne 2i
.SH EXAMPLE
Here is an example Atmel Generic file.
It contains the data \[lq]Hello, World[rq] to be loaded at bytes address 0x0100
(but remember, the file contents are word addressed).
.RS
.nf
.ft CW
000080:4865
000081:6C6C
000082:6F2C
000083:2057
000084:6F72
000085:6C64
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ds n) srec_cat
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
