'\" t
.\" srecord - Manipulate EPROM load files
.\" Copyright (C) 2011 Peter Miller
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_ppx
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_ppx \- Stag Prom Programmer hexadecimal format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_ppx(5)" "Stag Prom Programmer hexadecimal format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is the native hexadecimal format of the Stag Prom Programmer.
.SS Format
The file must start with an asterisk '*' on a line by itself.
.PP
Each line has a 16\[hy]bit address, followed by 8\[hy]bit bytes.
.PP
The end is indicated by '$S' folloowed by a 16\[hy]bit checksum of the
data bytes as 4 hex digits.
.SS Command Line Option
This format is specified using the \fB\-PPX\fP
command line option.
.SS Size Multiplier
In general, binary data will expand in sized by approximately 3 times
when represented with this format (worse if you use shorter lines).
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.br
.ne 2i
.SH EXAMPLE
Here is an example PPX file.
It contains the data \[lq]Hello, World\[rq] to be loaded at bytes address 0x0000
(but remember, the file contents are always multiples of four bytes).
.RS
.nf
.ft CW
*
0000 48 65 6C 6C 6F 2C 20 57 6F 72 6C 64 21 0A $S0473
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
http://matthieu.benoit.free.fr/pdf/pp39.pdf
http://www.stag.co.uk/
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ds n) srec_cat
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
.\" vim: set ts=8 sw=4 et :
