'\" t
.\"     srecord - manipulate eprom load files
.\"     Copyright (C) 2002, 2004, 2006-2009 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_os65v
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_os65v \- OS65V Loader file format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_os65v(5)" "OS65V Loader file format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
This format is used by Ohio Scientific OS65V\[hy]compatible loaders.  This
family of machines includes the OSI C1P, Superboard II, C2, C4, C8,
and Challenger III, as well as the UK101, and Elektor Junior.
.PP
The file startes with a period '.' (0x2E), to ensure address entry
mode.  then a 4\[hy]digit hex address, followed by a slash '/' (0X2F) to
enter the data entry mode.  The initial address is always present.
There is no need for an additional address record unless there are
gaps.
.LP
Each data byte is represented as 2 hexadecimal characters, and is
separated by a carriage return character (0x0D) (advance address).
The final return character may be omitted.
.LP
The data is concluded with a period '.' (0x2E) to re\[hy]enter address
mode.  If an address to start execution is specified, then the last 5
bytes are \fInnnn\fPG where \fInnnn\fP is the 4\[hy]digit execution
address, and G is the 'Go' command.
.SS Size Multiplier
In general, binary data will expand in sized by approximately 3.0 times
when represented with this format.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.br
.ne 2i
.SH EXAMPLE
Here is an example ascii\[hy]hex file.
It contains the data \[lq]Hello, World[rq] to be loaded at address 0x1000,
with execution at 0x1003.  (On a 6502, this is the opcode for indirect
jump to 0x2C6F.)
.LP
1000/48^M65^M6C^M6C^M6F^M2C^M20^M57^M6F^M72^M6C^M64^M0A^M.1010G
.RE
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ds n) srec_cat
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
