'\" t
.\"     srecord - manipulate eprom load files
.\"     Copyright (C) 2003, 2006-2009 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_needham
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_needham \- Needham EMP\[hy]series programmer ASCII file format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_needham(5)" "Needham EMP\[hy]series programmer ASCII file format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
This format is understood by Needham Electronics' EMP\[hy]series programmers.
See \f[CW]www.needhams.com/winman.pdf\fP for more information.
(This format is very similar to the ASCII\[hy]Hex format, but without the ^B
and ^C guard characters.)
.PP
Each data byte is represented as 2 hexadecimal characters,
and is separated by white space from all other data bytes.
.LP
The address for data bytes is set by using a sequence of
\f[CW]$A\fP\f[CI]nnnn\fP\f[CW],\fP characters, where \fInnnn\fP is the
8\[hy]character ascii representation of the address.  The comma is required.
There is no need for an address record unless there are gaps.  Implicitly,
the file starts a address 0 if no address is set before the first
data byte.
.SS Size Multiplier
In general, binary data will expand in sized by approximately 3.0 times
when represented with this format.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.br
.ne 2i
.SH EXAMPLE
Here is an example ascii\[hy]hex file.
It contains the data \[lq]Hello, World[rq] to be loaded at address 0x1000.
.RS
.nf
.ft CW
$A1000,
48 65 6C 6C 6F 2C 20 57 6F 72 6C 64 0A
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ds n) srec_cat
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
