'\" t
.\"     srecord - manipulate eprom load files
.\"     Copyright (C) 2001, 2004, 2006-2009, 2011 Peter Miller
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program. If not, see
.\"     <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.ds n) srec_dec_binary
.TH \*(n) 5 SRecord "Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
srec_dec_binary \- DEC Binary (XXDP) file format
.if require_index \{
.XX "srec_dec_binary(5)" "DEC Binary (XXDP) file format"
.\}
.SH DESCRIPTION
The DEC Binary (XXDP) format was used on the PDP 11 series machines.
This is a binary format, and is not readable or editable with a text editor.
The file consists of records of the form
.TS
center,allbox,tab(;);
l l l l l.
type;length;address;...data...;checksum
.TE
The field are defined as follows:
.TP 8n
type
Two byte little\[hy]endian value.
Must always be 1.
.TP 8n
length
Two byte little\[hy]endian value.
This is the number of bytes in the data, plus six.
.TP 8n
address
Two byte little\[hy]endian value.
This is the load address of the data.
.TP 8n
data
The data is simple raw bytes.
There are (length\[hy]6) of them.
.TP 8n
checksum
The checcksum is a single byte.
It is the negative of the simple summ of all the header and data bytes.
.PP
If the record length is exactly 6 (\fIi.e.\fP no data), this is the
execution start address record, indicating the transfer address.
.PP
In addition there may be NUL padding characters between records.
It is common for records to be padded so that they start on even byte
boundaries.  In the days of paper tape, it was common for the file to
have many leading NULs, to generate blank leader on the tape.
.SS Size Multiplier
In general, raw binary data will expand in sized by approximately 1.03 times
when represented with this format.
.ds n) srec_cat
.so man/man1/z_copyright.so
